So we've done our sidebar and the footer and the post loop. It's now time to do the header and it will eventually
look like this.
And I always like to remind you that this is not the best designed template so that it might not look
that pretty but you just need to focus on the functionality.
So for this lecture we'll see how to add this seach form and site title.
And for the navigation at the, it's a long enough topic to have it's own section.
Let's go back to our template and in our folder let's open header.php.
And before starting I just want to let you know that I've installed Font Awesome using NPM.
So "npm install" and this command here and I added "-- save" to be saved in the package.json.
And also I loaded the fonts in our bundle file, bundle sass file.
And that's in these three lines.
It's worth pointing that if you would like to add some third party library like Font Awesome
it's a best practice to bundle them in your CSS file.
You might think maybe it's easier to add a cd and link or something.
But if you read the theme requirements on Theme Forest they mentioned that you shouldn't use the cd
ends and any third party library you include,
it should be bundled in your files.
So that's why I included them in the sass file.
And when we compile our sass they are bundled in our final CSS file.
So anyways, let's go to our header.
And now let's create our main header.
So I'm gonna use the HEADER tag with a "role" of "banner". And I'm gonna give it a class to add a margin
"u-margin
-bottom"
and "-40".
And let's create a div to wrap all our content in a div. So let's add a with an ID "content"
that will open after the header and then close it just before the footer. So here.
We should have a header and then the DIV with ID "content" and then the footer.
Let's nowadd some classes that I styled for the header.
So we have "".
End.
And then we've "<div class="o-container"
and "u-flex". These are usually the classes for flexbox. "u-allign-justify"
and "u-allign-middle". And you can check these classes in the sass files.
And then we have a DIV for the logo with a class
"c-header__logo".
And then in the theme options section we'll learn how to get the logo from the user as an image
but now let's add the site title.
So an ANCHOR link with a class
"c-header__blogname".
And then "href="
open PHP and then echo "home_url()".
And this is the URL of your website.
Let's close PHP.
And then inside the ANCHOR tag we'll open another PHP tag and display the
using the bloginfo() function
we will show the site name.
So these are template tags that display information about your web site.
So let's close the PHP tag and then close the ANCHOR tag.
And if you are paying attention you will notice that we forgot something important here.
We need to escape URL for the link.
And esc_html for the blog name.
So let's see how that looks like.
And we've here header now and the site name and it links to the home page.
Let's now add the search form.
So after the logo class we'll open a PHP tag and use a template tag called get_search_form(). And it takes
a boolean whether to echo the HTML of the form or we just return it.
So we need to echo so, let's gonna give it true. And close and let's see what this looks like.
And it's the search form as you can see and WordPress automatically generates the HTML for this one.
But you can create your own markup and you will see how in a moment.
So let's type this anything.
And this will take you to a link with an "s" parameter in the URL.
So for these functions that WordPress generate HTML for you can add some lines of code in your theme
to make WordPress to use HTML5 syntax for HTML it generates like this search form.
So to do that we have to type something in functions.php. And let's
let's add a new file in the lib folder.
And let's call it "theme-support
.php". And let's include this file in the functions.php. "theme-support".
So here we have to create a function. Let's open PHP tags.
And don't forget to prefix, "_themename".
And it's call it  "theme_support". And we'll attach this function to a hook, an action hook.
So "add_action()". And let's call "after_setup_theme".
And then the function name and ignore the other parameters.
So this action is used to add support for features that are not supported by default by WordPress.
So for example one of these features is, remember in the very early lectures when we created this header.php
file and we mentioned that we don't need to add a TITLE tag and WordPress will generate it automatically
using the
wp_head() hook, right?
But if we go now to the web site you'll find no title, you'll find the URL.
And that's because you want to explicitly tell WordPress I want to support this feature. And that's through the
"after_setup_theme" action.
So inside the function we can call a function called add_theme_support(). And it takes a "feature".
So the feature for the title is" title-tag"
So let's save and see our title now.
And as you can see in the tab now, in the header there is title. And it's automatically generated by WordPress, here
you don't need to do anything.
So some other features that you'll need
to add is.
You know when you create a post you have an option to add a thumbnail. And this is not supported by default so we have
we have to explicitly mention that we would like to support this.
So "post-thumbnails". And we'll add other features throughout the course but let's add the one that we need
now which is the HTML5.
So it's called "html5".
And then it takes an array of things that you want to support HTML5 for.
So we have our search form.
Let's also have the "comments" or "comment-list","comment-form".
We've the "gallery" and the "caption".
So let's save now and now our HTML, our form will support HTML5 syntax.
So that was just a side note.
Let's carry on now and we need now to customize the search form in order to look like this one.
And that's why I actually installed Font Awesome to use this search icon.
So let's go ahead now and create our custom form.
So in header.php we call get_search_form(). And get_search_form() as I mentioned will generate the
HTML for the search form.
But before that it would actually search your theme folder for a file called searchform.php.
So in the root theme folder create a new file called searchform.php.
And let's just type some text here.
And now let's fresh.
And now we have our file loaded. So now in the search form file we can create our own form with our own markup.
So let's do that.
So to create a search form you simply create a normal HTML form.
And this form will submit a get requests. So
the method is "get". And the action will be your home, your.
So let's open a PHP tag and echo "esc_url()".
And "home_url" and the root path. And remove the extra arguments we don't need these. And close PHP
and close the FORM tag.
So now I have a form. And now we need a search input.
So it's also simple
HTML input of type "search". And this is important.
The name should be "s" because this is what WordPress use in order to filter your posts with this parameter.
So let's close the INPUT. And then we can have a button to submit.
So you should have a type "submit".
And let's see now. So we now have a search input and a button. And it takes you to the URL, home
URL with the "s" parameter. So WordPress
now will know that if you request a URL with the "s" parameter that you are in search page and it
will display the search page template and filter the posts against the search query.
So that's actually all you need in order to create a search form.
Anything else you add is just to add extra functionality to the form.
So one minor improvement we can do is add a placeholder.
So we don't have an empty input here. But it would also be nice to have here instead of the placeholder
the value of the current query if we are in a search page.
So if we do that we can add a value. And inside PHP tags we'll call a function called get_search_query().
And that will get the search query
if there is one and an empty string
otherwise.
But notice that this is the value of the "value" attribute.
So it's an HTML attribute , so we should use the esc_attr()  before echoing it.
And now we'll have the value that we typed. Let's type another one
and it's still there.
So for me the reason I wanted to create a custom search form is to add my classes and to add the
icon. So instead of wasting your time and type the whole thing here, I'm gonna paste it. And just walk through it
real quick.
So I added a class "c-search-form" and, you know, a label with some classes and some accessibility
bit here.
"screen-reader-text" because a label needs a text.
But in my case I didn't want to display it for styling issues so I put it in SPAN and give it a class
screener text. And then we have our input with a class and the placeholder. And the placeholder of course
should be escaped and translated.
So use "_x" here. If you remember "_x" will give context to your translated string.
And then I have my button and my icon here, the I tag.
And then because also for accessibility about and should have a text, so I added SPAN with a "screen-reader
-text" class. And inside of it, the text for the button. So you can take a look at this form and if
you have any questions let me know.
I just thought it would be a waste of time to type all of it on screen.
So in the next lecture we'll discuss how to create the navigation and make menus and pretty much everything
you need to know about navigation WordPress. So see you in the next section.